[Music]
Welcome to Math with Mr. J.
In this video, I'm going to cover how to
find slope from a graph by counting
units. And remember, slope measures the
steepness of a line. So, how much a line
goes up or down as it moves from left to
right. We will go through four examples
together and then you'll try some
practice problems on your own. Let's
jump into number one where we need to
find the slope of the line graphed on
the coordinate plane. Now looking at the
line, notice that the line is moving
upward as it's moving from left to
right. This is what we call a positive
slope. As far as finding the slope,
slope equals
the rise over the run. So the vertical
change over the horizontal change.
Basically, we're looking at how fast is
this line moving upward as it moves from
left to right. When finding slope, we
use any two points on the line. It
doesn't matter which two, we will get
the same slope. So, let's use this point
right here and this point right here. We
need to figure out how far up and how
far over we go between these two points.
We're going to move from the left point
to the right point. We go up one unit,
two units,
three units to align with the other
point. That's our rise, the vertical
change. Then we go over one unit, two
units, three units, four units to get to
the other point. So that's our run, the
horizontal change. So slope equals and
I'm using m for slope here. We can use m
to represent slope. So slope equals
rise
over run. And now we can plug in our
rise and run. The rise
is three. The run is four. And this is
our slope. 3 over 4 3/4s. The slope
tells us that this line goes up 3 units
for every four units it goes to the
right. Now, before moving on to number
two, I do want to go over how any other
two points will work as well. So, if we
pick this point right here and this
point right here, let's see what the
slope will be. Well, we go up one unit,
two units, three units. So, our rise
here is three. And then we go over one
unit, 2 units, 3 units, four units. So,
our run is four. We end up with the same
slope. But what if we pick this point
right here and this point right here?
Well, the rise is one unit, two units,
three units, four units, five units,
six units to align with that point. So
the rise is six. And then our run. Well,
1 unit, 2 units, 3 units, 4 units, 5
units, 6 units, 7 units, 8 units. So our
run is 8. So slope equals our rise was 6
and our run was 8. So we end up with the
slope of 6 over 8, 68. So did we get a
different slope? The answer is actually
no. This is the same slope because when
it comes to slope, we want to look to
simplify any fractions. And 6/8s can be
simplified. 6/8s is actually equivalent
to 34s. As far as simplifying, 6 and 8
have a common factor of two that we can
divide by. 6 / 2 is 3 and 8 / 2 is 4. So
we get that slope of 34s. Let's try some
more examples and move on to number two.
Taking a look at number two. Notice that
this line is moving downward from left
to right. This is what we call a
negative slope. So let's find the slope
again. slope equals rise
over run. So let's find the rise and run
here. So we need to pick any two points.
Let's pick this point and this point.
Let's start with the rise the vertical
change. So looking from the left point
to the right point here we need to go
down from the left point to align with
the right point. We go down one unit,
two units. And since we went down, our
rise is negative. This is -2. That's our
vertical change. Now for the run, we go
over one unit, 2 units, 3 units, four
units, five units in order to get to the
other point. So our run the horizontal
change is five and that's a positive
five since we moved to the right. Now we
can plug in our rise and run here. Our
rise is -2 and our run is five.
This is our slope. And this fraction is
in simplest form. So we are done. -2
over 5, -2s.
The slope tells us that this line goes
down 2 units for every five units it
goes to the right. And just to check,
let's use this point and this point to
see if we get the same thing. So our
vertical change here is one unit, two
units down, so -2 here. And then our
run, the horizontal change, we go one
unit, 2 units, 3 units, four units, and
five units. So our run is five. Let's
move on to number three. Now let's take
a look at number three where we have
another example of a negative slope.
This line is moving downward from left
to right. So let's find the slope. So
slope equals
rise over run. Let's write this out
again in order to get this down. And now
let's find the rise and the run. We'll
use this point right here and this point
right here. Let's start with the rise.
And we're going to go down in order to
align with the other point. So starting
here we go down one unit, two units,
three units, four units, five units,
six units. So our rise, the vertical
change is -6 since we went down. Now we
need our run, the horizontal change, and
we only go over one unit here and we
went to the right. So this is a positive
one. So our run is one. So let's write
our slope here. So our slope equals the
rise
-6 and the run 1. So our slope -6 over
one. That slope tells us that this line
goes down six units for every one unit
it goes to the right. Now something to
keep in mind here. Since the denominator
is 1, we can also write this slope as
just -6.
Either of these will work and mean the
same thing. Keeping the fractional form
makes the rise and run a little more
clear, but we will also see slope
written as just an integer. So if you
ever see the slope written as just an
integer, so no fraction, the run is one.
Lastly, let's move on to number four.
Taking a look at number four, we have a
line with a positive slope. It's moving
upward as it's moving from left to
right. Let's find the slope. So slope
equals
rise
over run. So let's find the rise and the
run here. So we'll use the two points we
are given. This point right here and
this point right here. So we'll go from
the left point to the right point. Let's
start with the rise. We go up one unit,
2 units, 3 units, four units, 5 units, 6
units, 7 units, 8 units, 9 units, 10
units. So our rise, the vertical change
is 10 and that's a positive 10. We went
up. Now for the run, we go over one
unit, two units, three units, and that's
a positive three since we went to the
right. So our run, the horizontal change
is three. So our slope here is 10
over 3, 10/3. That tells us that this
line goes up 10 units for every three
units it goes to the right. So there are
our four examples. Time for you to try
some practice problems on your own. So
have paper and a pencil ready. Here are
your practice problems. Find the slope
of each line. I'll give you two minutes
and then we will go over the answers. Go
ahead and start.
Heat.
[Music]
Okay, so that was 2 minutes. Let's go
over the answers. So here are our
answers. For number one, the slope is
1/2. The rise is 1 and the run is 2. For
number two, the slope is -4 over 1. Or
we can write this as just -4. The rise
is -4 and the run is one. Moving on to
number three, the slope is 5/3. The rise
is 5 and the run is three. And then
lastly for number four, the slope is
-27.
The rise is -2 and the run is 7. So
there you have it. There's how to find
slope by counting units. I hope that
helped. Thanks so much for watching.
Until next time, peace.